---
source_url: https://aras-p.info/blog/page/2
source_id: aras-p-blog
fetched_at: 2026-05-16T17:32:17.667855+00:00
fetcher: html_mirror
sha256: 90c281739f1772ce2bd24cdc5157336d6206540d84dd398779d7bf65aa2828ae
---

Blogs ·  Aras' website
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

    
  
    
      

  
  
  
  
  
    

Back in 2021 I looked at [OpenEXR lossless compression](/blog/2021/08/04/EXR-Lossless-Compression/) options *(and I think
my findings led a change of the default [zip compression level](/blog/2021/08/05/EXR-Zip-compression-levels/), as well as change of the compression library from
[zlib to libdeflate](/blog/2021/08/09/EXR-libdeflate-is-great/). Yay blogging about things!)*. Then in 2023 I looked
at losslessly compressing a bunch of [floating point data](/blog/2023/01/29/Float-Compression-0-Intro/), some of which might be image-shaped.

Well, now a discussion somewhere else has nerd-sniped me to look into **lossless** compression of **floating point** images,
and especially the ones that might have more than just RGB(A) color channels. *Read on!*

Four bullet point summary, if you’re in a hurry:

- **Keep on using OpenEXR with ZIP** compression.

- Soon OpenEXR might add HTJ2K compression; that compresses slightly better but is worse compression *and* decompression performance, so YMMV.

- **JPEG-XL is not competitive** with OpenEXR in this area today.

- You *can* cook up a “custom image compression” that seems to be better than all of EXR, EXR HTJ2K and JPEG-XL, while also being way faster.

### My use case and the data set

What I wanted to primarily look at, are “multi-layer” images that would be used for film composition workflows. In such an image, a single pixel
does not have just the typical RGB (and possibly alpha) channels, but might have more. Ambient occlusion, direct lighting, indirect lighting,
depth, normal, velocity, object ID, material ID, and so on. And the data itself is almost always floating point values (either FP16 or FP32);
sometimes with different precision for different channels within the same image.

There does not seem to be a readily available “standard image set” like that to test things on, so I grabbed some that I could find, and some
I have rendered myself out of various [Blender splash screen files](https://www.blender.org/download/demo-files/#splash). Here’s the 10
data files I’m testing on (total uncompressed pixel size: 3122MB):

File
Resolution
Uncompressed size
Channels
Sample

[Blender281rgb16.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender281rgb16.exr)
3840x2160
47.5MB
RGB half

[Blender281rgb32.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender281rgb32.exr)
3840x2160
94.9MB
RGB float

[Blender281layered16.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender281layered16.exr)
3840x2160
332.2MB
21 channels, half
  

[Blender281layered32.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender281layered32.exr)
3840x2160
664.5MB
21 channels, float

[Blender35.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender35.exr)
3840x2160
332.2MB
18 channels, mixed half/float
  

[Blender40.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender40.exr)
3840x2160
348.0MB
15 channels, mixed half/float
  

[Blender41.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender41.exr)
3840x2160
743.6MB
37 channels, mixed half/float
   

[Blender43.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/Blender43.exr)
3840x2160
47.5MB
RGB half

[ph_brown_photostudio_02_8k.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/ph_brown_photostudio_02_8k.exr)
8192x4096
384.0MB
RGB float, from [polyhaven](https://polyhaven.com/a/brown_photostudio_02)

[ph_golden_gate_hills_4k.exr](https://aras-p.info/files/exr_files/ph_golden_gate_hills_4k.exr)
4096x2048
128.0MB
RGBA float, from [polyhaven](https://polyhaven.com/a/golden_gate_hills)

### OpenEXR

****[OpenEXR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenEXR) is an image file format that has existed since 1999, and is primarily used within film, vfx and
game industries. It has several lossless compression modes (see my [previous blog post series](/blog/2021/08/04/EXR-Lossless-Compression/)).

It looks like OpenEXR 3.4 (should be out 2025 Q3) is adding a new `HTJ2K` compression mode, which is based on
“[High-Throughput JPEG 2000](https://jpeg.org/jpeg2000/htj2k.html)” format/algorithms, using open source
[OpenJPH](https://github.com/aous72/OpenJPH) library. The new mode is already in OpenEXR main branch
([PR #2041](https://github.com/AcademySoftwareFoundation/openexr/pull/2041)).

So here’s how EXR does on my data set *(click for a larger interactive chart)*:   

This is two plots: compression ratio vs. compression performance, and compression ratio vs. decompression performance.
In both cases, the best place on the chart is top right – the largest compression ratio, and the best performance.

For performance, I’m measuring it in GB/s, in terms of *uncompressed data size*. That is, if we have 1GB worth of raw image
pixel data and processing it took half a second, that’s 2GB/s throughput (even if *compressed data size* might be different).
Note that the vertical scale of both graphs is different. I am measuring compression/decompression time without actual disk I/O,
for simplicity – that is, I am “writing” and “reading” “files” from memory. The graph is from a run on Apple MacBookPro M4 Max,
with things being compiled in “Release” build configuration using Xcode/clang 16.1.

Green dot is EXR ZIP at default compression level (which is 4, but changing the level does not affect things much). Blue dot is the new
**EXR HTJ2K compression – a bit better compression ratio, but also lower performance**. Hmm dunno, not very impressive? However:

- From what I understand, HTJ2K achieves better ratio on RGB images by applying a de-correlation transform. In case of multi-layer EXR
files (which is most of my data set), it only does that for one layer (usually the “final color” one), but does not try to do that
on, for example, “direct diffuse” layer which is also “actually RGB colors”. Maybe future work within OpenEXR HTJ2K will improve this?

- Initial HTJ2K evaluation [done in 2024](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/17349244/openexr%2Bht-v10.pdf) found that a
commercial HTJ2K implementation (from [Kakadu](https://kakadusoftware.com/)) is quite a bit faster than the OpenJPH that is used in
OpenEXR. Maybe future work within OpenJPH will speed it up?

- It very well might be that once/if OpenEXR will get *lossy* HTJ2K, things would be much more interesting. But that is a whole another topic.

I was testing OpenEXR main branch code from 2025 June (3.4.0-dev, rev `45ee12752`), and things are multi-threaded via
`Imf::setGlobalThreadCount()`. Addition of HTJ2K compression codec adds 308 kilobytes to executable size by the way (on Windows x64 build).

*Moving on.*

### JPEG-XL lossless

****[JPEG-XL](https://jpeg.org/jpegxl/index.html) is a modern image file format that aims to be a good improvement over many already existing
image formats; both lossless and lossy, supporting stardard and high dynamic range images, and so on. There’s a recent
“[The JPEG XL Image Coding System](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05987)” paper on arXiv with many details and impressive results, and the
reference open source implementation is [libjxl](https://github.com/libjxl/libjxl).

However, the arXiv paper above does not have any comparisons in how well JPEG-XL does on *floating point* data (it does have HDR image
comparisons, but at 10/12/16 bit integers with a HDR transfer function, which is not the same). So here is me, trying out
JPEG-XL lossless mode on images that are either FP16 or FP32 data, often with many layers (JPEG-XL supports this via “additional channels”
concept), and sometimes with different floating point types based on channel.

Here’s results with existing EXR data, and JPEG-XL additions in larger red dots *(click for an interactive chart)*:   

Immediate thoughts are ***okay this can achieve better compression***, coupled with ***geez that is slow***. Expanding a bit:

- At compression effort 1-3 JPEG-XL does not win against OpenEXR (ZIP / HTJ2K) on compression ration, while being 3x slower to compress,
and 3x-7x slower to decompress. So that is clearly not a useful place to be.

- At compression effort levels 4+ it starts winning in compression ratio. Level 4 wins against HTJ2K a bit (1.947x -> 2.09x); the default
level 7 wins more (2.186x), and there’s quite a large increase in ratio at level 8 (2.435x). I briefly tried levels 9 and 10,
but they do not seem to be giving much ratio gains, while being *extraordinarily slow* to compress. Even level 8 is already **100 times slower**
to compress than EXR, and 5-13x slower to decompress. So yeah, if final file size is *really* important to you, then maybe; on the other hand,
100x slower compression is, well, slow.

Looking at the feature set and documentation of the format, it *feels* that JPEG-XL is mostly and primarily is targeted at “actually displayed images,
perhaps for the web”. Whereas with EXR, you can immediately see that it is *not* meant for “images that are displayed” – it does not even
have a concept of low dynamic range imagery; everything is geared towards it being for images used in the middle of the pipeline. From that falls out
built-in features like arbitrary number of channels, multi-part images, mipmaps, etc. Within JPEG-XL, everything is centered around “color”,
and while it *can* do more than just color, these feel like bolted-on things. It can do multiple frames, but these have to be same size/format
and are meant in the “animation frames” sense; it can do multiple layers but these are meant in the “photoshop layers” sense; it talks about
storing floating point data, but it is in the “HDR color or values a bit out of color gamut” sense. And that is fine; the JPEG-XL coding system
paper itself has a chart of what JPEG-XL wants to be (I circled that with red) and where EXR is (circled with green):   

More subjective notes and impressions:

- Perhaps the floating point paths within `libjxl` did not (yet?) get the same attention as “regular images” did; it is very
possible that they will improve the performance and/or ratio in the future (I was testing end-of-June 2025 code).

- A cumbersome part of `libjxl` is that color channels need to be interleaved, and all the “other channels” need
to be separate (planar). All my data is fully interleaved, so it costs some performance to arrange it as libjxl wants,
both for compression and after decompression. As a user, it would be much more convenient to use if their API
was similar to OpenEXR `Slice` that takes a pointer and two strides (stride between pixels, and stride between rows). Then
any combination of interleaved/planar or mixed formats for different channels could be passed with the same API.
In my own test code, reading and writing EXR images using OpenEXR is
[80 lines of code](https://github.com/aras-p/test_exr_htj2k_jxl/blob/1586d680/src/image_exr.cpp), whereas JPEG-XL
via libjxl is [550 lines](https://github.com/aras-p/test_exr_htj2k_jxl/blob/1586d680/src/image_jxl.cpp).

- On half-precision floats (FP16), `libjxl` currently is *not fully lossless* – subnormal values do not roundtrip
correctly ([issue #3881](https://github.com/libjxl/libjxl/issues/3881)). The documentation also says that non-finite values
(infinities / NaNs) in both FP32 and FP16 are not *expected* to roundtrip in an otherwise lossless mode. This is in contrast
with EXR, where even for NaNs, their exact bit patterns are fully preserved. Again, this does not matter if the intended
use case is “images on screen”, but matters if your use case is “this looks like an image, but is just some data”.

- From what I can tell, some people did performance evaluations of EXR ZIP vs JPEG-XL by using `ffmpeg` EXR support; do not do that.
At least right now, ffmpeg EXR code is their own custom implementation, that is completely single threaded and lacks
some other optimizations that official OpenEXR library does.

I was testing libjxl main branch code from 2025 June (0.12-dev, rev `a75b322e`), and things are multi-threaded via
`JxlThreadParallelRunner`. Library adds 6017 kilobytes to executable size (on Windows x64 build).

*And now for something completely different:*

### Mesh Optimizer to compress images, why not?

Back when I was playing around with [floating point data compression](/blog/2023/01/29/Float-Compression-0-Intro/), one
of the things I tried was using ****[meshoptimizer](https://github.com/zeux/meshoptimizer) by Arseny Kapoulkine to losslessly
compress the data. It [worked quite well](/blog/2023/02/02/Float-Compression-4-Mesh-Optimizer/), so why not try this again. Especially
since it got both compression ratio and performance improvements since then.

So let’s try a “MOP”, which is not an actual image format, just something I quickly cooked up:

- A small header with image size and channel information,

- Then image is split into chunks, each being 16K pixels in size. Each chunk is compressed independently and in parallel.

- A small table with compressed sizes for each chunk is written after the header, followed by the compressed data itself
for each chunk.

- Mesh optimizer needs “vertex size” (pixel size in this case) to be multiple of four; if that is not the case the chunk data
is padded with zeroes inside the compression/decompression code.

- And just like the previous time: mesh optimizer vertex codec is *not* an LZ-based compressor (it seems to be more like delta/prediction
scheme that is packed nicely), and you *can* further compress the result by just piping it to a regular lossless compressor.
In my case, I used [zstd](https://facebook.github.io/zstd/).

So here’s how “MOP” does on my data set *(click for a larger interactive chart)*:   

The purple dots are the new “MOP” additions. You can see there are two groups of them: 1) around 2.0x ratio and very high decompression speed is
just mesh optimizer vertex codec, 2) around 2.3x ratio and slightly lower decompression speed is mesh optimizer codec followed by zstd.

And that is… **very impressive, I think:**

- Just mesh optimizer vertex codec itself is about the same or slightly higher compression ratio as EXR HTJ2K, while being almost 2x faster to compress
and 5x faster to decompress.

- Coupled with zstd, it achieves compression ratio that is between JPEG-XL levels 7-8 (2.3x), while being 30-100 *times* faster to compress and 20 *times*
faster to decompress. This combination also very handily wins against EXR (both ZIP and HTJ2K), in both ratio and performance.

- [Arseny](https://zeux.io/about/) is a witch!?

I was testing mesh optimizer v0.24 (2025 June) and zstd v1.5.7 (2025 Feb). Mesh optimizer itself adds just 26 kilobytes (!) of executable code;
however zstd adds 405 kilobytes.

And here are the results of all the above, running on a different CPU, OS and compiler (Ryzen 5950X, Windows 10, Visual Studio 2022 v17.14).
Everything is several times slower (some of that is due to Apple M4 having crazy high memory bandwidth, some of that CPU differences, some of that
compiler differences, some OS behavior with large allocations, etc.). But overall “shape” of the charts is more or less the same:  

### That’s it for now!

So there. Source code of everything above is over at [github.com/aras-p/test_exr_htj2k_jxl](https://github.com/aras-p/test_exr_htj2k_jxl). Again, my own
take aways are:

- EXR ZIP is fine,

- EXR HTJ2K is slightly better compression, worse performance. There is hope that performance can be improved.

- JPEG-XL does not feel like a natural fit for this (multi-layered, floating point) images right now. However, it *could*
become one in the future, perhaps.

- JPEG-XL (libjxl) compression performance is *very slow*, however it can achieve better ratios than EXR. Decompression performance is also several times
slower. It is possible that both performance and ratio could be improved, especially if they did not focus on floating point cases yet.

- Mesh Optimizer (optionally coupled with zstd) is *very* impressive, both in terms of compression ratio and performance. It is not an actual
image format that exists today, but if you need to losslessly compress some floating point images for internal needs only, it is worth looking at.

And again, all of that was for fully lossless compression. Lossy compression is a whole another topic, that I may or might not look into someday.
Or, someone else could look! Feel free to use the image set I have used.

  

  
  
  

---

  
  
  
  
    

Sergey from Blender asked me to look into why trying to manually sprinkle some SIMD into Cycles renderer Voronoi
node code actually made things slower, and I started to look, and what I did in the end had nothing to do with SIMD
whatsoever!

*TL;DR: Blender 5.0 changed [Voronoi node hash function to a faster one](https://projects.blender.org/blender/blender/pulls/139520).*

### Voronoi in Blender

Blender has a [Voronoi node](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/4.5/render/shader_nodes/textures/voronoi.html)
that can be used in any node based scenario (materials, compositor, geometry nodes). More precisely, it is
actually a [Worley noise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Worley_noise) procedural noise function. It can be used
to produce various interesting patterns:   

A [typical implementation](https://www.shadertoy.com/view/ldl3Dl) of Voronoi uses a hash function to randomly offset each grid cell. For something
like a 3D noise case, it has to calculate said hash on 27 neighboring cells (3x3x3), for each item
being evaluated. That is a lot of hashing!

Current implementation of e.g. “calculate random 0..1 3D offset for a 3D cell coordinate” looked like this in Blender:

```
// Jenkins Lookup3 Hash Function
// https://burtleburtle.net/bob/c/lookup3.c
#define rot(x, k) (((x) << (k)) | ((x) >> (32 - (k))))
#define mix(a, b, c) { \
    a -= c; a ^= rot(c, 4); c += b; \
    b -= a; b ^= rot(a, 6); a += c; \
    c -= b; c ^= rot(b, 8); b += a; \
    a -= c; a ^= rot(c, 16); c += b; \
    b -= a; b ^= rot(a, 19); a += c; \
    c -= b; c ^= rot(b, 4); b += a; \
}
#define final(a, b, c) { \
    c ^= b; c -= rot(b, 14); \
    a ^= c; a -= rot(c, 11); \
    b ^= a; b -= rot(a, 25); \
    c ^= b; c -= rot(b, 16); \
    a ^= c; a -= rot(c, 4); \
    b ^= a; b -= rot(a, 14); \
    c ^= b; c -= rot(b, 24); \
}
uint hash_uint3(uint kx, uint ky, uint kz)
{
    uint a;
    uint b;
    uint c;
    a = b = c = 0xdeadbeef + (3 << 2) + 13;
    c += kz;
    b += ky;
    a += kx;
    final(a, b, c);
    return c;
}
uint hash_uint4(uint kx, uint ky, uint kz, uint kw)
{
    uint a;
    uint b;
    uint c;
    a = b = c = 0xdeadbeef + (4 << 2) + 13;
    a += kx;
    b += ky;
    c += kz;
    mix(a, b, c);
    a += kw;
    final(a, b, c);
    return c;
}

float uint_to_float_incl(uint n)
{
    return (float)n * (1.0f / (float)0xFFFFFFFFu);
}
float hash_uint3_to_float(uint kx, uint ky, uint kz)
{
    return uint_to_float_incl(hash_uint3(kx, ky, kz));
}
float hash_uint4_to_float(uint kx, uint ky, uint kz, uint kw)
{
    return uint_to_float_incl(hash_uint4(kx, ky, kz, kw));
}
float hash_float3_to_float(float3 k)
{
    return hash_uint3_to_float(as_uint(k.x), as_uint(k.y), as_uint(k.z));
}
float hash_float4_to_float(float4 k)
{
    return hash_uint4_to_float(as_uint(k.x), as_uint(k.y), as_uint(k.z), as_uint(k.w));
}

float3 hash_float3_to_float3(float3 k)
{
    return float3(hash_float3_to_float(k),
        hash_float4_to_float(float4(k.x, k.y, k.z, 1.0)),
        hash_float4_to_float(float4(k.x, k.y, k.z, 2.0)));
}

```

i.e. it is based on Bob Jenkins’ [“lookup3” hash function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jenkins_hash_function#lookup3),
and does that “kind of three times”, pretending to hash `float3(x,y,z)`, `float4(x,y,z,1)` and `float4(x,y,z,2)`.
This is to calculate *one* offset of the grid cell. Repeat that to 27 grid cells for 3D Voronoi case.

### I know! Let’s switch to PCG3D hash!

If you are aware of “[Hash Functions for GPU Rendering](https://jcgt.org/published/0009/03/02/)” (Jarzynski, Olano, 2020) paper, you can
say *“hey, maybe instead of using hash function from 1997, let’s use a dedicated 3D->3D hash function from several decades later”*.
And you would be absolutely right:

```
uint3 hash_pcg3d(uint3 v)
{
  v = v * 1664525u + 1013904223u;
  v.x += v.y * v.z;
  v.y += v.z * v.x;
  v.z += v.x * v.y;
  v = v ^ (v >> 16);
  v.x += v.y * v.z;
  v.y += v.z * v.x;
  v.z += v.x * v.y;
  return v;
}
float3 hash_float3_to_float3(float3 k)
{
  uint3 uk = as_uint3(k);
  uint3 h = hash_pcg3d(uk);
  float3 f = float3(h);
  return f * (1.0f / (float)0xFFFFFFFFu);
}

```

Which is *way cheaper* (the hash function itself is like 4x faster on modern CPUs). Good! We are done!

If you are using hash functions from the 1990s, try some of the more modern ones!
They might be both simpler and the same or better quality.
Hash functions from several decades ago **were built on assumption
that multiplication is very expensive, which is very much not
the case anymore**.

So you do this for various Voronoi cases of 2D->2D, 3D->3D, 4D->4D. First in the Cycles C++ code
(which compiles itself to both CPU execution, and to GPU via CUDA/Metal/HIP/oneAPI), then
in EEVEE GPU shader code (GLSL), then in regular Blender C++ code (which is used in geometry nodes
and CPU compositor).

*And you think you are done until you realize…*

### Cycles with Open Shading Language (OSL)

The test suite reminds you that Blender [Cycles can use OSL](https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/4.5/render/cycles/osl/index.html)
as the shading backend. [Open Shading Language](https://github.com/AcademySoftwareFoundation/OpenShadingLanguage), similar to
GLSL, HLSL or RSL, is a C-like language to write shaders in. Unlike some other languages, a “shader” does not output color;
instead it outputs a “radiance closure” so that the result can be importance-sampled by the renderer, etc.

So I thought, okay, instead of updating the Voronoi code in three places (Cycles CPU, EEVEE GPU, Blender CPU), it will have to
be four places. Let’s find out where and how does Cycles implements the shader nodes for OSL, update that place, and we’re good.

Except… turns out, OSL *does not have unsigned integers* (see [data types](https://open-shading-language.readthedocs.io/en/v1.13.12.0/datatypes.html)).
Also, it does not have *bitcast from float to int*.

I certainly did not expect an “Advanced shading language for production GI renderers” to not have a concept of unsigned integers,
in year 2025 LOL :) I knew nothing about OSL just a day before, and now I was there wondering about the language data type system.

Luckily enough, specifically for Voronoi case, all of that can be worked around by:

- Noticing that everywhere within Voronoi code, we need to calculate a pseudorandom “cell offset” out of integer cell
coordinates only. That is, we do not need `hash_float3_to_float3`, we need `hash_int3_to_float3`. This works around the lack
of bit casts in OSL.

- We can work around lack of unsigned integers with a slight modification to PCG hash, that just operates on signed integers instead.
OSL *can* do multiplications, XORs and bit shifts, just only on signed integers. Fine with us!

```
int3 hash_pcg3d_i(int3 v)
{
  v = v * 1664525 + 1013904223;
  v.x += v.y * v.z;
  v.y += v.z * v.x;
  v.z += v.x * v.y;
  v = v ^ (v >> 16);
  v.x += v.y * v.z;
  v.y += v.z * v.x;
  v.z += v.x * v.y;
  return v & 0x7FFFFFFF;
}
float3 hash_int3_to_float3(int3 k)
{
  int3 h = hash_pcg3d_i(k);
  float3 f = float3((float)h.x, (float)h.y, (float)h.z);
  return f * (1.0f / (float)0x7FFFFFFFu);
}

```

So that works, just instead of *only* having to change `hash_float3_to_float3` and friends, this now required updating
all the Voronoi code itself as well, to make it hash integer cell coordinates as inputs.

“Wait, but how did Voronoi OSL code work in Blender previously?!”

Good question! It was using the OSL ``[built-in hashnoise() functions](https://open-shading-language.readthedocs.io/en/v1.13.12.0/stdlib.html#pattern-generation)
that take float as input, and produce a float output. And… yup, they just *happened* to use exactly the same Jenkins Lookup3 hash function underneath.
Happy coincidence? One implementation copying what the other was doing? I don’t know.

It would be nice if OSL got unsigned integers and bitcasts though. Since today, if you need to hash float->float, you can only use the built-in OSL
hash function, which is not particularly fast. For Voronoi case that can be worked around, but I bet there are other cases where workign around it is much harder.

### So that’s it!

The ****[pull request](https://projects.blender.org/blender/blender/pulls/139520) that makes Blender Voronoi node 2x-3x faster has been merged for Blender 5.0.
It *does* change the actual resulting Voronoi pattern, e.g. before and after:   

So while it “behaves” the same, the literal pattern has changed. And that is why a 5.0 release sounds like good timing to do it.

What did I learn?

- *Actually* learned about how Voronoi/Worley noise code works, instead of only casually hearing about it.

- Learned that various nodes within Blender have *four* separate implementations, that all have to match in behavior.

- Learned that there is a shading language, in 2025, that does not have unsigned integers :)

- There can be (and is) code out there that is using hash functions from the previous millenium, which might be not optimal today.

- I should still look at the SIMD aspect of this whole thing.

  

  
  
  

---

  
  
  
  
    

Three years ago I found myself [speeding up Blender OBJ importer](/blog/2022/05/12/speeding-up-blender-obj-import/),
and this time I am rewriting Blender FBX importer. Or, letting
someone else take care of the *actually complex* parts of it.

*TL;DR: Blender 4.5 will have a [new FBX importer](https://projects.blender.org/blender/blender/pulls/132406).*

### FBX in Blender

****[FBX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FBX), a 3D and animation interchange format owned by
Kaydara Alias *Autodesk*, is a proprietary format that is still quite popular in some spaces.
The file format itself is quite good actually; the largest
downsides of it are: 1) it is closed and with no public spec, and 2) due to it being very flexible, various
software represent their data in funny and sometimes incompatible ways. The future of the format
seems to be “dead” at this point; after a decade of continued improvements to the FBX format and the SDK,
Autodesk seems to have stopped around year 2020. However, the two big game engines (Unity and Unreal) still
both treat FBX as the primary format in how 3D data gets into the engine. But going forward, perhaps one should
use [USD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Scene_Description),
[glTF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GlTF) or [Alembic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alembic_(computer_graphics)).

Blender, by design / out of principle only uses open source libraries for everything that ships inside of it.
Which means it can not use the official (closed source, binary only) [Autodesk FBX SDK](https://aps.autodesk.com/developer/overview/fbx-sdk),
and instead had to reverse engineer the format and write their own code to do import/export. And so they did!
They added FBX export in 2.44 (year 2007), and import in 2.69 (year 2013), and have a short reverse engineered
FBX format description on the [developer blog](https://code.blender.org/2013/08/fbx-binary-file-format-specification/).

The FBX import/export functionality, as was common within Blender at the time, was written in pure Python. Which
is great for the expressiveness and makes for very compact code, but is not that great for many other reasons. However,
it has been expanded, fixed and optimized over the years – recent versions use NumPy for many heavy number
crunching parts, the exporter does some multi-threaded Deflate compression, and so on. The whole
implementation is about 12 thousand lines of Python code, which is very compact, given that it does import, export
and all the Blender parts too (that comes at a cost though… in some places it feels *too compact*, when someone
else wants to understand what the code is doing :)).

*So far so good! However, [ufbx](https://github.com/ufbx/ufbx) open source library was born sometime in 2019.*

### ufbx, and other FBX parsers

**ufbx** ([github](https://github.com/ufbx/ufbx), [website](https://ufbx.github.io/)) by Samuli Raivio is a single source file
C library for loading FBX files.

And holy potatoes, it is an excellent library. Seriously: ufbx *is one of the best written libraries I’ve ever seen*.

- Compiles out of the box with no configuration needed. You *can* configure it very extensively, if you want to:

- Disable parts of library you don’t need (e.g. subdivision surface evaluation, animation layer blending evaluation, etc.).

- Pass your own memory allocation functions, your own job scheduler, even your own C runtime functions.

- Disable data validation, disable loading of certain kinds of data, and so on.

- The API and the data structures exposed by it just *make sense*. This is highly subjective, but I found it very
easy to use and find my way around.

- It is very extensively tested at multiple levels.

And also, it is *very fast*. I actually wanted to compare ufbx with the official FBX SDK, and several other open source
FBX parsing libraries I managed to find ([AssImp](https://github.com/assimp/assimp), [OpenFBX](https://github.com/nem0/OpenFBX)).

Here’s time it takes (in seconds, on Ryzen 5950X / Windows / VS2022) to read 9 FBX files (total size 2GB), and extract very
basic information about the scene (how many vertices in total, etc.). There is sequential time (read files one by one),
and parallel time (read files in parallel, independently), as well size of the executable that does all that.

Parser
Time sequential, s
Time parallel, s
Executable size, KB

ufbx
9.8
2.7
457

ufbx w/ internal threads
4.4
2.6
462

FBX SDK
869.9
crash!
4508

AssImp
33.9
26.7
1060

OpenFBX
26.7
15.8
312

Or, in more visual form:   

Does performance of the official FBX SDK look very bad here? Yes indeed it does. This seems to be due to two reasons:

- It can not parse several FBX files in parallel. It just can’t due to shared global data of some sorts.

- On *some files* (mostly the ones that have *lots* of animation curves, or *lots* of instancing), it is *very slow*. Not to parse
them! But to clean up after you are done with parsing. Looks like even if you want to tell it “yeet everything”, it proceeds
to do that one entity at a time, doing a lot of work making sure that after removing each individual little shit, it is properly
de-registered from any other things that were referencing it. Probably effectively a quadratic complexity amount of work.

I have put source code and more details of these tests over at [github.com/aras-p/test-fbx-parsers](https://github.com/aras-p/test-fbx-parsers)

Anyway, if you need to load/parse FBX files, just use ufbx!

### Blender 4.5: new FBX importer

So, I made a new FBX importer for Blender 4.5 ([pull request](https://projects.blender.org/blender/blender/pulls/132406)). So far it is
marked “experimental”, and for a while both the new one and the Python-based one will co-exist. Until the new one is sufficiently
tested and the old one can be removed.

The new importer comes with several advantages, like:

- It supports ASCII FBX files, as well as binary FBX files that are older than FBX 7.1.

- Better handling of “geometric transform” (common in 3dsmax), support for more types of Material shading models, imported animations
are better organized into Actions/Slots.

- So far I have found about 20 existing open bug reports, where current FBX importer was importing something wrong, and the new one
does the correct thing.

- Right now there is one bug report about the new importer doing *incorrect* thing… looking into it! :)

Oh, and it is quite a bit faster too. While the Python based importer was *quite fast* (for Python, that is), the new one is often 5x-20x
faster, while using less memory too. Here are some tests, import times in seconds (Ryzen 5950X):

Test case
Notes
Time Python
Time new

Blender 3.0 Splash
30k instances
83.4
4.7

Rain Restaurant
300k animation curves
86.8
4.4

Zero Day
6M triangles, 8K objects
22.1
1.7

Caldera
21M triangles, 6K objects
44.2
4.4

Even if it is ufbx that takes care of all the *actually complex* parts of the work, I still managed to waste *spend* quite a lot of time on this.

However, most of the time I spent procrastinating, in the style of “*oh no, now I will have to do materials, this is going to be complex*”
– proceed to find excuses to not do it just yet – eventually do it, and turns out it was not as scary. Besides stalling this way, most of the other
time sink has been just learning innards of Blender (the whole area of Armatures, Bones, EditBones, bPoseChannels is *quite something*).

The amount of code for just the Blender importer side (i.e. not counting ufbx itself) still ended up at 3000 lines, which is not compact at all.

Anyway, now what remains is to fix the open issues (so far… just one!), do a bunch of improvements I have in mind, and ship this to the world in
Blender 4.5. You can try out [daily builds](https://builder.blender.org/download/daily/) yourself!

And then… maybe a new FBX *exporter*? We will see.

  

  
  
  

---

  
  
  
  
    

*We just spent a week-and-a-bit in southern part of United States, so here’s a bunch
of photos and some random thoughts!*

Aistė went for a work related conference in New Orleans, and we (myself and our two
kids) joined her after that. A bit in New Orleans, then driving across the
Gulf of Mexico coast towards Orlando.

I wanted to see New Orleans mostly due to its historical importance for music,
and we wanted to end the trip in Kennedy Space Center due to, well, *“space! rockets!”*

### New Orleans

The conference Aistė attended was great, but she was struck by anxiety experienced
by her American colleagues regarding all the current shitshow in the country.
Decades of achievements in diversity, inclusion, healthcare access, scientific
advancements are wiped away by some idiot manbabies. We still remember the not-too-distant
times when the “head of the state” was above all reason, rules and logic, and that is not
a great setup :(

Anyway. New Orleans definitely looks *different* than most other US cities I’ve been to.
However, I somehow expected *something more*, but not sure what exactly. Maybe more
spontaneous / magic music moments? They are probably happening somewhere, we just did not
stumble into them. Several times we saw homeless people playing music in their own bands
out in the parks, and while that is cool, it is also sad.

### New Orleans National WWII Museum

I did not have high expectations going into [WWII museum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_National_WWII_Museum);
I expected something bombastic, proudly proclaiming how US victoriously
planted their flag and saved the world *(no reason to think like this,
I just have stereotypes)*. The museum is nothing like that; I think it conveys
wery well how a war is really a shit situation, and everything is terrible there.
Both the Pacific Theater and the European Theater exhibits are full of stories
of failed operations, strategic miscalculations, and so on.

That last photo above however… how quaint! *<gestures at, well, everything around>*

### [Whitney Plantation](https://whitneyplantation.org/)

I had not realized that many plantations continued to operate well into the 20th
century, often with the same people working at them that used to be slaves.
*“You are free now! Except you have no property, money, or education. Good luck out there!”*

The last picture is from a nearby [Evergreen Plantation](https://www.evergreenplantation.org/) which is
closed now. You might have seen the house in [Django Unchained](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Django_Unchained).

### Barataria Preserve

Some nice [bayou](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayou) trails near
New Orleans at [Barataria Preserve](https://www.nps.gov/jela/planyourvisit/barataria-preserve.htm).

### Battleship Memorial Park

Driving towards Orlando, we stopped at the
[Battleship Memorial Park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battleship_Memorial_Park) in Mobile, Alabama.
[USS Alabama](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USS_Alabama_(BB-60)) is
very impressive from engineering standpoint. Heck, it is over 80 years old by now!
Now of course, it would be ideal if such engineering was not needed at all… but here we are.

### Pensacola Beach

We only caught an evening glimpse of [Pensacola Beach](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pensacola_Beach,_Florida)
while driving onwards. The whole color scheme is impressively blue in the evening!

### Maclay State Gardens

[Alfred B. Maclay State Gardens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_B._Maclay_Gardens_State_Park)
park near Tallahassee was a somewhat random choice for a stop, and it turned out
to be very impressive. Magnolias, azaleas and camellias are in beautiful bloom,
and the tillandsias look like magic.

### Gator / Bird watching

Airboat tour at Tohopekaliga lake near Orlando, FL. It was a shame
that this tour guide focused only on the gators, more or less. There was so many
other things around!

### Kennedy Space Center

Visitor complex at the [Kennedy Space Center](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kennedy_Space_Center_Visitor_Complex)
is *very* impressive. The only problem is – way too many people! :)
At least when we visited, it was packed with primary and middle school
kids, who, it turns out, create an impressive amount of noise and chaos.

But seeing the actual [Shace Shuttle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Shuttle_Atlantis)
and [Saturn V](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturn_V) is a sight to behold.
The photos do not convey the scale.

### That’s it!

So that was our trip! Short and sweet, and we only hit a minor snag on the way
back due to a flight delay, which made us miss the next flight, so the total
journey back became some 30 hours. The luggage arrived as well, *eventually* :)

    
    
      
    

On the plane back I watched
[Soundtrack to a Coup d’Etat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soundtrack_to_a_Coup_d%27Etat),
a 2024 documentary about 1961, with newly independent Congo, UN, large powers of the world
(US and USSR) dividing their spheres of influence, music as a soft power,
and various plots for eventual control of natural resource deposits. *Political backroom
deals over natural resource deposits? Proclaiming support and then backstabbing someone?
Ugh the 60s, how antiquated, surely something like that would not happen in 21st century. Right?!*

It is a good movie.

Maybe people should smell more blooms.   

  

  
  
  

---

  
  
  
  
    

Rune Skovbo Johansen has a really sweet ****[Surface-Stable Fractal Dithering](https://github.com/runevision/Dither3D)
technique, where the dither dots “stick” to 3D surfaces, yet the dot density adapts to the view distance and zoom
level.

Some people have asked whether this would be a good technique for [Playdate](https://play.date/), given that the screen
is one-bit color. And so I had to try it out! Here’s a video:   

    
    
      
    

And here’s the code: ****[github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d).

This is a long-arse post, so here’s the sections:

### Is it practical?

My impression: **not really practical**.

Playdate hardware is like a PC from 1995 - no GPU at all, one fairly simple CPU
core. As such, it can do fairly simple 3D rendering (well, you need to write the whole rasterizer on the CPU),
but can barely do more than a handful of math operations per rasterized pixel. Rasterizing with screen-space fixed
Bayer or Blue Noise dither patterns is the way to go due to their simplicity.

You can *barely* do textured triangles, whereas cost of Fractal Dithering is, with some simplifications, at
least twice that (you still need to interpolate the texture coordinates, do some additional math on them, do a
3D texture lookup, and additional math on that).

But, while doing this, I’ve learned a thing or two about software rasterizers. Of course, everyone else has learned that
in 1997, but I’ve *never* written a perspective-correct textured triangle rasterizer… As
the old saying goes, “the best time to write a triangle rasterizer was thirty years ago. The second best time is today.”
So what follows is various notes I have made during the process.

### Surface-Stable Fractal Dithering

Rune has a really great [video explaining the technique](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HPqGaIMVuLs), and an extended
[feature demo video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EzjWBmhO_1E), plus all the source in the
[github repository](https://github.com/runevision/Dither3D), with most of the shader logic being in
[Dither3DInclude.cginc](https://github.com/runevision/Dither3D/blob/main/Assets/Dither3D/Dither3DInclude.cginc)
HLSL shader file.

Here’s an outline of the steps. We have some scene where the input for dithering is “brightness”:   

And the Surface-Stable Fractal Dithering (with a 4x4 dither pattern) turns it into this:   

Now, the dots above are still nicely anti-aliased; whereas Playdate is strictly 1-bit screen. Giving it only
two colors, and making them similar to how the device screen looks like, the result would be like this (note that
resolution here is 2x larger than Playdate, i.e. 800x480):   

In addition to brightness, the dithering process needs geometry texture coordinates (“UVs”) as well. The dithering
pattern “sticks” to the surfaces by placing them in UV space.   

It also needs the derivatives of UVs in screen space, to know “how fast” they change across the screen projection. That
will be used to make sure the dither pattern is roughly constant size on screen. On the GPU, the derivatives
fall out naturally out of 2x2 pixel execution pattern, and in HLSL are provided by `ddx` and `ddy` built-in functions.
Here they are, visualized as `abs(ddx(uv))*100` and `abs(ddy(uv))*100` respectively:   

Now, given these four derivative values, the technique uses singular value decomposition to find the minimum and
maximum rate of change (these might not be aligned to screen axes). The maximum and minimum frequencies (scaled up 30x)
look like:  

The minimum frequency, together with user/material-specified dot spacing factor, gets turned into base
dither dot spacing value:

Then it is further adjusted by input brightness (if “size variability” material parameter is zero), so that
the actual dots stay roughly the same size, but in darker areas their spacing spreads further out.

This spacing is then used to calculate two factors used to sample a 3D lookup texture: 1) by which power
of two to adjust the mesh UVs so that the dither dots pattern is placed onto surface properly, and 2) which
actual dither pattern “slice” to use, so that the pattern more or less seamlessly blends between powers-of-two
levels.

The mesh UVs, adjusted for 3D texture sampling, look like this, as well as indication which Z slice of the texture to use:  

Result of sampling the 3D lookup texture (that was prepared ahead of time) is:

The 3D texture itself for the 4x4 dither pattern (64x64x16, with 3D texture slices side by side) looks like this:

*We’re almost there!* Next up, the algorithm calculates contrast factor, which is based on material settings,
dot spacing, and the ratio of minimum and maximum UV rate of change. From that, the base brightness value
that the contrast is scaled around is calculated (normally it would be 0.5, but where the pattern would be very blurry
that would look bad, so there it is scaled away). And finally, the threshold value to compare the radial gradient from
3D texture is calculated based on input brightness. The contrast, base value and threshold respectively look like:  

And finally we get our result:  

So all of that was… *<takes a quick look>* something like one 3D texture sample, 4 divisions, 2 raises to a
power, 3 square roots, 3 exp2s, 1 log2, and several dozen regular multiplies or additions for every pixel.
Provided you have UVs and their derivatives already, that is.

That should, like, *totally fly* on a Playdate, right? 🥹

Anyway, let’s do this! But first…

### Perspective correct texturing

Triangles have texture coordinates defined at their vertices, and while rasterizing the triangle, you interpolate
the texture coordinates, and at each pixel, read the texture value corresponding to the interpolated coordinate.
Here’s a simple checkerboard texture using interpolated UVs (ignore the noisy dithering; it is unrelated):   

However, if we look at the same mesh at an angle, it looks really weird:  

That is because under perspective projection, you need to use
[perspective correct texture mapping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texture_mapping#Perspective_correctness),
and not just simply interpolate UVs in screen space. With perspective correction things look good, however that
means now we have to do a division per-pixel. And, divisions are slow. Anyway, this is the least of our problems
(for now…).  

### Displaying brightness on a Playdate

Playdate [hardware](https://help.play.date/hardware/the-specs/) has 1-bit “memory LCD” display: each pixel
can only be “on” or “off”. So typically to display “brightness”, some sort of dithering is used. The example
simple 3D rasterizer included in the [Playdate SDK](https://play.date/dev/) (“mini3d”) contains code
that rasterizes triangles using different patterns based on brightness:   

Another common approach is to use a [blue noise texture](https://momentsingraphics.de/BlueNoise.html)
for thresholding the brightness. I’ve used that approach in “[Everybody Wants to Crank the World](/blog/2024/05/20/Crank-the-World-Playdate-demo/)”
Playdate demo as well.  

So the question now is, could Surface-Stable Fractal Noise be another approach to display “brightness” on a 1-bit
Playdate screen?

### “Porting” Surface-Stable Fractal Noise to Playdate

I had a triangle rasterizer based on Fabian Giesen’s
“[Simple watertight triangle rasterizer](https://gist.github.com/rygorous/9b793cd21d876da928bf4c7f3e625908)”
working on a Playdate. This is a half-space / barycentric rasterizer, which is a good fit for hardware
or modern CPUs with SIMD instruction sets. It *might* be a bad fit for Playdate CPU, but for now we’re not very
concerned with that. The code is nice and small; further recommended reading from Fabian are
“[The barycentric conspiracy](https://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/06/the-barycentric-conspirac/)”,
“[Triangle rasterization in practice](https://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/08/triangle-rasterization-in-practice/)”,
“[Optimizing the basic rasterizer](https://fgiesen.wordpress.com/2013/02/10/optimizing-the-basic-rasterizer/)”
blog posts, as well as “[Fast software rasteriser in JavaScript?](https://www.pouet.net/topic.php?which=8760&page=1#c408170)”
discussion on pouët.

Initial port of Rune’s [dithering shader code](https://github.com/runevision/Dither3D/blob/main/Assets/Dither3D/Dither3DInclude.cginc) on a Playdate looked like this:  

Welp, this does not look correct *at all*. Time to debug where exactly it goes wrong!

For development convenience, I have the whole “[playdate application](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d)”
setup as both a Playdate build target, and an application that can build for PC.
There’s a super tiny “platform abstraction” that provides pointer to “screen”, as well as input
controls handling, and on a Playdate that goes directly into the SDK, whereas on a PC that is all handled
through [Sokol](https://github.com/floooh/sokol). Is nice!

For the “PC” build target, in addition to the regular 1-bit “screen” buffer, I also have a full-color
“RGBA per pixel” debug overlay buffer. That way I can have the correct shader with some debug visualizations
running in Unity, and my own “shader port” running in a software rasterizer, side by side, with
a full color debug overlay. Check it out – left side my code (displaying obviously incorrect result),
right side Unity:   

The mesh UVs are correct and interpolated correctly (multiplied by 5 to see their interpolation better):   

Derivatives in my code, turns out, were not entirely wrong, but not correct either:   

At that point my rasterizer was doing 1 pixel at a time, so in order to calculate the derivatives
I tried to calculate them with some math, and got the math wrong, obviously. With the full
proper calculation, they were correct:  

Turns out I also had the 3D texture Z layers order wrong, and with that fixed, everything else
was correct too. Dither UVs, 3D texture radial pattern, render result, render result with 2 colors
only, and finally render result with non-constant input lighting:   

So, yay! It works!

It runs at… *830 milliseconds* per frame though (1.2FPS). 🐌

### Optimizing Fractal Dithering

Trivially move some math from per-pixel to be done once per triangle: *604ms*.

Replace division and `exp2f` call by directly working on floating point bits. If we are in “regular floats”
range (no NaNs/infinities/denormals), `x / exp2f((float)i)` can be replaced by something like:

```
// equivalent to `x / exp2f((float)i)`, provided we are not in
// infinities / subnormals territory.
static inline float adjust_float_exp(float x, int i)
{
    union {
        float f;
        uint32_t u;
    } fu;
    fu.f = x;
    fu.u -= (uint32_t)i << 23;
    return fu.f;
}

```

In the dither shader, this was used to transform mesh UVs to the fractal pattern UVs. That gets us down to
*316ms*, yay! (by the way, such an optimization for today’s GPUs is barely – if at all – worth doing)

Likewise, in the 3D texture fractal level and fraction calculation that uses `log2f` and a `floorf`
can also be replaced with direct float bit manipulation:

```
//float spacingLog = log2f(spacing);
//const float patternScaleLevel = floorf(spacingLog); // Fractal level.
//const int patternScaleLevel_i = (int)patternScaleLevel;
//float f = spacingLog - patternScaleLevel; // Fractional part.
//
// instead of above, work on float bits directly:
union {
    float f;
    uint32_t u;
} fu;
fu.f = spacing;
// patternScaleLevel is just float exponent:
const int patternScaleLevel_i = (int)((fu.u >> 23) & 0xFF) - 127;
// fractional part is:
// - take the mantissa bits of spacing,
// - set exponent to 127, i.e. range [0,1)
// - use that as a float and subtract 1.0
fu.u = (fu.u & 0x7FFFFF) | 0x3F800000;
float f = fu.f - 1.0f;

```

*And now we are at 245ms.*

And now, switch the rasterizer to operate in 2x2 pixel blocks (hey, just like a GPU does!). This *does*
make the code much longer ([commit](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d/commit/82b157d58e4)),
but things like derivatives come “for free”, plus it allows doing a bunch
of calculations (all the dither dot spacing, 3D texture level etc.) once per 2x2 pixel block. *149ms.*

[Some](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d/commit/48ce2c9a875)
[more](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d/commit/6a090aee21c) simple math operation moves
and we’re at *123ms*.

At this point I was out of easy ideas, so I decided that running “full” effect on a Playdate
is not going to work, so **it is time to simplify / approximate it**.

The effect spends quite some effort in determining nice “contrast” value, but it comes with a cost:
doing singular value decomposition on the four derivatives, a division, and a bunch of other maths.
Let’s remove all that, and instead determine dither pattern spacing by a simple average of `dU/dX`,
`dV/dX`, `dU/dY`, `dV/dY`. Then there’s no longer additional contrast tweak based on “blurriness”
(ratio of min/max UV change). However, it runs at *107ms* now, but looks different:   

The 3D lookup texture for dithering, at 64x64x16 resolution, is 64 kilobytes in size. The CPU
cache is only 8KB, and the memory bandwidth is not great. Maybe we could reduce the texture horizontal
resolution (to 32x32x16), for a 16KB texture, and it would not reduce quality all that much? Looks
a bit different, but hey, *83ms* now:  

Instead of doing perspective correct UV interpolation for every pixel, do it for every
2nd pixel only, i.e. for the first column of each 2x2 pixel block. For the other column,
do regular interpolation between this and next block’s UV values
([commit](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d/commit/69334c13eba)). *75ms*:  

Simplify the final math that does sampled 3D texture result comparison, now it is just a simple
“compare value with threshold”. *65ms*:  

At this point I was out of easy ideas how to speed it up further (harder ideas: do perspective correct
interpolation at even lower frequency). However, anecdotally, the whole current approach
of using halfspace/barycentric rasterizer is probably not a good fit for the Playdate CPU (it does
not have SIMD instructions that would be useful for this task, afterall). So maybe I should
try out the classic “scanline” rasterizer approach?

### Scanline Rasterizers

The [Playdate SDK](https://play.date/dev/) sample code (“mini3d”) contains a simple scanline triangle rasterizer,
however it can only cover whole triangle in a screen-space aligned pattern, and has no support for
texture coordinates or any other sort of interpolation. However, people have taken that and expanded
on it, e.g. there’s [Mini3D+](https://github.com/nstbayless/mini3d-plus) that adds near plane clipping,
texturing, alpha-testing, fog, etc. Nice!

So let’s try it out. Here’s the same scene, with just a pure black/white checkerboard pattern based on mesh
UVs. My existing halfspace/barycentric rasterizer, and the one from Mini3D+ respectively:

Immediate notes:

- Yes the scanline rasterizer (for UV based checkerboard at least) is faster using the scanline approach
(54ms halfspace, 33ms scanline),

- However the scanline one has more “artifacts”: stray black pixels near edge of plane/cube, and in general
things are shifted by a pixel here and there for some reason. At this point I do not know which one
is “more correct” however, but the difference was bothering me :)

- The checkerboard lines are “more wiggly” in the scanline one, most visible on the “floor” object.

I tried to “port” the dithering effect to this rasterizer, but got lost in trying to calculate the correct
UV derivatives (horizontal ones are easy, vertical ones are harder). And the subtle rendering differences
were bothering me, so I decided to *actually* read up about scanline rasterizers. The seminal series
on them are from 1995/1996, by Chris Hecker for Game Developer Magazine. Hecker has the archive
and the code drop at his website: [Perspective Texture Mapping](https://chrishecker.com/Miscellaneous_Technical_Articles).

So! Taking the initial (fully floating point) rasterizer from Hecker’s code, the UV based checkerboard
renders like this:   

This one runs slower than Mini3D+ one (42ms), but does not have stray “black pixels” artifacts around some
mesh edges, and the lines on the floor are no longer wiggly. However, it is *slightly different* compared
to the halfspace one! Why? This has nothing to do with task at hand, but the fact was bothering me, so…

### Comparing Scanline Rasterizers to actual GPU

Again using my “colored debug overlay on PC build” feature, I made a synthetic “test scene” with various cases
of UV mapped geometry, with cases like:

- Checkerboard should map exactly 1:1 to pixels, at regular orientation, and geometry being rotated
by exactly 90 degrees,

- The same, but geometry coordinates being shifted by less than half a pixel; the result should look the same.

- Some geometry that should be exactly one pixel away from screen edge,

- Some geometry where each checkerboard square should map to 1.5 (will have aliasing patterns) or 2 (should be exact)
screen pixels.

- Several cases of perspective projection,

- Several cases of geometry being clipped by screen edges.

Here’s how it is rendered by the halfspace/barycentric rasterizer:  

And then I made a simple Unity shader & C# script that renders exactly the same setup, using actual GPU. Here it is (pasted
into the same window frame as the test app):  

Not exactly the same, but *really close*, I’ll claim this is acceptable (FWIW, GPUs use 8 bits subtexel precision,
whereas my code uses 4 bits).

The rasterizer from Mini3D+ however looks much more different: 1) some cases do not map checkerboard to pixels 1:1,
2) the artifacts between some faces is where the rasterizer is not “watertight” and neighboring faces both
write to the same pixels, 3) some cases where geometry should be exactly one pixel away from screen edge are actually not.   

Hecker’s “fully floating point” rasterizer looks better, but still a lot more different from what the GPU does.  

The fixed point, sub-dividing affine span rasterizer from Hecker’s code (i.e. the last iteration before the assembly-optimized
one) looks like this however. It fixes some artifacts from the previous one, but still covers slightly different pixels
compared to the GPU, and introduces UV wrapping artifacts at right sides of some planes.   

My understanding of the difference is that *maybe Hecker’s rasterizer follows pre-Direct3D 10 coordinate conventions*,
i.e. where pixel integer coordinates are placed directly on pixel centers. From part 3 of the article series, there’s
this bit:

I chose the corresponding screen coordinates for the destination. I wanted the destination pixel centers to map
exactly to the source pixel centers.

And when talking about how one would map a texture directly to screen at 1:1 ratio, he talks about adding -0.5 offset
to the coordinates. This sounds very much like what people back in Direct3D 8/9 times had to always keep in mind,
or try to [solve that automatically in all their shaders](/blog/2016/04/08/solving-dx9-half-pixel-offset/).

While this coordinate system intuitively makes sense (pixel centers are at integer coordinates, yay!),
eventually everyone realized it causes more problems down the line. The official
[DirectX Specs website](https://microsoft.github.io/DirectX-Specs/d3d/archive/D3D11_3_FunctionalSpec.htm#3.3.1%20Pixel%20Coordinate%20System) minces no words:

D3D9 and prior had a terrible Pixel Coordinate System where the origin was the center of the top left pixel on the RenderTarget

Armed with that guess, I [changed](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d/commit/b691214bbd70)
the Hecker’s rasterizer code to shift positions by half a pixel, and remove the complexicated `dUdXModifier` dance
it was doing. And it became *way* closer to what the GPU is doing:  

The fixed point, subdividing affine Hecker’s rasterizer with the above fix was *more correct* than
the one from Mini3D+, and running a *tiny bit* faster by now. So I left only that code, and proceeded with it.

### Back to scanline rasterizer

Initial “port” of the Fractal Dithering to the scanline rasterizer was at *102ms*, i.e. slower than
halfspace one (63ms). But, I was calculating the UV derivatives for every pixel. Derivatives along
X axis are cheap (just difference to next pixel, which the inner scanline loop already does),
but the vertical ones I was doing in a “slow but correct” way.  

The derivatives change fairly slowly across the triangle surface however, so what if I calculate
`dU/dY` and `dV/dY` only at the scanline endpoints, and just interpolate it across? This gets us
down to *71ms*.  

But hey! *Maybe I do not need the per-pixel UV derivatives at all?* The whole reason for derivatives
is to calculate the dither pattern spacing. But, at least in my scenes, the spacing varies *very slowly*
(if at all) across the triangle surface. Recall the previous visualization:  

I can just calculate the derivatives at triangle vertices, do all the dither spacing
calculations there, and interpolate spacing value across the triangle. *56ms*!

Then, do the 3D lookup math directly from fixed point UVs that are interpolated
by the rasterizer. The previous “replace division by exp2” trick by working on floating
point bits is even simpler in fixed point: just shift by the provided integer
amount, and take the fractional bits as needed. *50ms*   

And the final optimization step I did so far has nothing to do with dithering step itself:
the higher level code was transforming all mesh triangles, calculating their normals for lighting,
then sorting them by distance, and finally rasterizing them back-to-front. Here the triangles
that are back-facing, outside of the screen, or zero-area are culled. I moved the triangle culling
to happen before sorting (there’s no point in sorting invisible triangles anyway), and now
the scanline dither effect runs at *45ms* (halfspace one at *60ms*).

### That’s it for now!

So, this scene runs at 45ms (20-22FPS) on the Playdate device right now, which is much better
than the initial 830ms (1.2FPS). Can it be made yet faster? Most likely.

Does it make it a practical effect on the Playdate? Dunno, it is quite heavy and at this low
resolution, does not look very good (it does not help that some approximations/simplifications
I did actually increase dither pattern aliasing).

But hey, this was fun! I learned a thing or three. And if you want either a scanline or
a halfspace rasterizer for Playdate that very closely matches what actual GPU would do
(i.e. it is a more correct rasterizer than mini3d from Playdate SDK or Mini3D+), you can find
them at [github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d](https://github.com/aras-p/playdate-dither3d)
